DtCI_ch06_stacks_queues.asciidoc, before:

[[DtCI_ch06]]

== Stacks and Queues

After reading this chapter, the reader should understand the ...

=== Stacks and Queues

Stacks and Queues are two kinds of data structures that

=== FIFO v. LIFO

FIFO v. LIFO

=== Stack Definition

A stack has a few different meanings in computer science, but when it comes to data structures, a stack is a "last in, first out" way of ordering data.
The analogy commonly given is of a stack of plates in a cafeteria, where the last plate placed on the stack is the first one that comes off the top.
Earlier we talked about "push/pop" functions available for arrays, and these are often used with stacks as well. 
A plate (or a pancake, or data) can be pushed onto the top of the stack, and that same plate (pancake, data) will be the first one popped off the top.  

=== Queue Definition

A queue is a "first in, first out" data structure akin to standing in line.
The first piece of data pushed into a queue is the first piece of data to be taken back out of it again.  

=== Developing Intuition: What are stacks and queues used for?

Stacks and queues are often used to indicate _priority_ in the processing of data.  
It's not hard to see why.
Imagine an elevator that only goes to two floors, say the ground floor and the 10th floor.
Ten people enter the elevator on the ground floor.
Because of the way elevators -- and society -- are constructed, the last people to board the elevator will be the first ones to leave it.
The elevator creates a priority by the way it is boarded.
It's simply impossible for the people who first board the elevator to exit first, as they will be furthest from the door.
This is an example of a stack.

A queue is even easier to understand.
We've all waited in line.
It even seems "unfair" for people to cut in line; the first in must be the first out!

There are, of course, exceptions to these rules. 
Pause for a moment and try to think of a real-world exception to each.

There are a few ways to use stacks and queues in computer science, but most often they are used for assigning priority to tasks.
They can be used to determine the priority of packets in a network or to determine tasks that must be completed before other tasks begin.

Is a for loop an example of a stack or a queue?  
What about a nested for loop?
What about the browser event loop?  


=== Example Questions

Here is an example of the sample that you're ample

[source, python]
----
print('hello world')
----

==== Balanced parentheses

How can you balance parentheses

==== Find the second smallest item

Find the second-smallest number in an array of integers.
Can you scale this to the third smallest?
Third largest?
Can you scale this to other sorts of ordering, like alphabetical order?

==== Implement x using a stack

How to implement x

Commit message:

Finished permutations, added placeholders in later chapters.

DtCI_ch06_stacks_queues.asciidoc, after:

[[DtCI_ch06]]

== Stacks and Queues

After reading this chapter, the reader should understand the ...

=== Stacks and Queues

Stacks and Queues are two kinds of data structures that

=== FIFO v. LIFO

FIFO v. LIFO

=== Stack Definition

A stack has a few different meanings in computer science, but when it comes to data structures, a stack is a "last in, first out" way of ordering data.
The analogy commonly given is of a stack of plates in a cafeteria, where the last plate placed on the stack is the first one that comes off the top.
Earlier we talked about "push/pop" functions available for arrays, and these are often used with stacks as well. 
A plate (or a pancake, or data) can be pushed onto the top of the stack, and that same plate (pancake, data) will be the first one popped off the top.  

=== Queue Definition

A queue is a "first in, first out" data structure akin to standing in line.
The first piece of data pushed into a queue is the first piece of data to be taken back out of it again.  

=== Developing Intuition: What are stacks and queues used for?

Stacks and queues are often used to indicate _priority_ in the processing of data.  
It's not hard to see why.
Imagine an elevator that only goes to two floors, say the ground floor and the 10th floor.
Ten people enter the elevator on the ground floor.
Because of the way elevators -- and society -- are constructed, the last people to board the elevator will be the first ones to leave it.
The elevator creates a priority by the way it is boarded.
It's simply impossible for the people who first board the elevator to exit first, as they will be furthest from the door.
This is an example of a stack.

A queue is even easier to understand.
We've all waited in line.
It even seems "unfair" for people to cut in line; the first in must be the first out!

There are, of course, exceptions to these rules. 
Pause for a moment and try to think of a real-world exception to each.

There are a few ways to use stacks and queues in computer science, but most often they are used for assigning priority to tasks.
They can be used to determine the priority of packets in a network or to determine tasks that must be completed before other tasks begin.

Is a for loop an example of a stack or a queue?  
What about a nested for loop?
What about the browser event loop?  


=== Example Questions

==== Permutations, revisited

Back in Chapter 4 we discussed permutations, and I showed you a simple iterative solution for coming up with all the combinations of a set of items in an array.  

Now that we've discussed stacks and queues, I'd like to show you how you can use one to more effectively solve the permutations problem:

Let's try doing it in a way that explores another concept called the _stack_.

[source, python]
----
def permute(arr):
    result = []
    stack = [(arr, [])]

    while stack:
        arr, path = stack.pop()
        if not arr:
            result.append(path)
        else:
            for i in range(len(arr)):
                stack.append((arr[:i] + arr[i+1:], path + [arr[i]]))

    return result

animals = ["lion", "tiger", "bear", "dog", "guppy"]
permutations = permute(animals)

for perm in permutations:
    print(perm)
----

==== Balanced parentheses

How can you balance parentheses

==== Find the second smallest item

Find the second-smallest number in an array of integers.
Can you scale this to the third smallest?
Third largest?
Can you scale this to other sorts of ordering, like alphabetical order?

==== Implement x using a stack

How to implement x
